1.1 String Data Type (str)
Introduction to String
A String is a sequence of characters used to store textual information in Python. Strings are one of the most commonly used data types and contain letters, numbers, spaces, and special symbols. Strings are enclosed within either single quotes (""I) or double quotes ("").
Example: name = "Sagar", city = 'Ahmedabad'

Characteristics of Strings
The important characteristics of strings are as follows:· Strings store textual data.
• Strinğs are ordered collections of characters,
• Strinğs are immutable in nature.
· Strinğs can be accessed using indexing, Because strings are
immutable, individual characters cannot be modified after creation.

Creating Strings in Python
Strings can be created using single quotes or double quotes.Example: language ="Python", course = ‘Programming?
Both statements create valid string objects, 

String Operations
Python provides various operations that can be performed on strings.Concatenation: first = “Hello", second = "World", result = first + second.
Repetition: word = “Python", print(word *3)

Accessing Characters
Characters inside a string can be accessed using index numbers.Example: text="Python", print(text[O]).Output:P.
Indexing starts from O in Python.

Applications of Strings
Strings are widely used for:
• User Names
•Passwords
• Messages
• Email Addresses
• File Names
· Text Processing

Summary
A String is used to store text data in Python. It is immutable, 
easy to use, and plays an important role in almost every Python application.

1.2 Integer Data Type (int)

Introduction to Integer
An Integer is a numeric dafa type used to store whole numbers.Integers do not contain decimal points and can be positive, negative, or zero. Python provides unlimited integer size, which allows
programmers to work with very large numbers.Example:age = 20 marks=95 year = 2025

Characteristics of Integers
The main characteristics of integers are:• Store whole numbers only.
• Can be positive or negative.
• Support mathematicaÏ operations.
Integers are one of the most commonly used data types in programming

Creating Integer Variables
Integer values can be assigned directly to variables.
Example: x=100 y=-502=0
All three variables store integer values.

Arithmetic Operations on Integers
Python allows various arithmetic operations on integer values.
Example：a=10 b=5Addition = g +b
Subtraction = g - b Multiplication = g *b Division =a/b These operations help perform calculations in programs.

Type Checking
The type() function is used to check the data type of a variable.
Example: num=100 print(type(num)) Output:"<class ‘int'>
This confirms that the variable belongs to the integer data type.

Applications of Integers
Integers are used in many real-world applications such as:
• Student Marks • Employee ID
• Age Calculation •Roll Numbers
•Product Quantity · Banking Systems

Summary
The Integer data type is used to store whole numbers. It
supports arithmetic operations and is widely used in mathematical calculations and data processing.

1.3 Float Data Type (float)

A Float is a numeric data type used to store decimal numbers.Float values contain a decimal point and are commonly used when precise numerical values are required.
Example: price =99.99 height=5.8 temperature = 36.5The important characteristics of float data type are:
•Stores decimal values.· Supports positive and'negative numbers.• Used in scientific calculations.· Allows mathematical operations.Float values provide more precision than integers.

Creating Float Variables
Float values can be assigned directly to variables.
Example: salary= 50000."5 weight =65.5 percentage =89.25
All these variables store float values.

Arithmetic Operations on Float
Various arithmetic operations can be performed on float values.
Example: a=10.5 b=2.5 Addition = a+b Subtraction=g-b
Multiplication=a*b Division =a/b
Float values are widely used in mathematical calculations.

Type Checking
The type() function can be used to identify float data types.Example: num=10.5 print(type(num)) Output:<class 'float'>This confirms that the variable belongs to float data type.

Applications of Float
• Temperature Measurement • Financial Applications
• Height Calculation •Percentage Calculation

Difference Between Inteqer and Float
Integer stores whole numbers without decimal points.Float stores numbers containing decimal values.
Example: 10 → Integer 10.5→ Float

Summary
The Float data type is used to store decimal values ython.
It is useful for calculations that require accuracy and precision.

1.4 Boolean Data Type (bool)

Introduction to Boolean
Boolean is a special data type in Python that stores only two values: True and False. It is widely used in decision-making, comparisons, and logical operations.
Example: isStudent兰 True isLoggedIn = False

Characteristics of Boolean
The important characteristics of Boolean data type are:
• Stores only True or False. •Used in conditional statements.
• Supports logical operations. • Helps in decision making.
Boolean values play a major role in program flow control.

Creating Boolean Variables
Boolean values can be assigned directly to variables.
Example: isAdmin = True isActive = False hasPermission= True These variables contain Boolean values.

Using Boolean in Conditions
Boolean values are commonly used with if statements.
Example: isLoggedln = True
if isloggedIn: print("Welcome User")
Output:Welcome User

Comparison Operations
Comparison operators return Boolean values.
Example：1035→True 10<5→False 10==10 →→ True These results are of Boolean type.

Logical Operations
Boolean values can be combined using logical operators.
Example:True and False → False True or False → True not True → False Logical operators are useful in complex conditions.

Applications of Boolean
Boolean values are used in:
• Login Systems •Authentication
•User Permission • Game Development
· User Permissions • Security Applications.

Type Checking
The type() function is used to check Boolean data type.
Example: status = True print(type(status)) Output:<class 'bool'

Summary
Boolean"data type stores only True and False values
It is essential for decision-making and controlling program execution in Python.

1.5 List Data Type

Introduction to List
A List is an ordered collection of multiple items stored in a single variable. Lists are one of the most frequently used data structures in Python because they allow storing different values together.
frúits = ["Apple", "Mango”, "Banand"]

Characteristics of List
The important characteristics of a List are:• Ordered collection of items.
· Mutable in. nature..
• Allows duplicate values.
· Can store"different data, types.• Uses square brackets [].
Lists provide flexibility in storing and managing data.

Creating_a List
Lists are created using square brackets.
numbers = [10,20,30.407mixed = [10, "Python", True]
mames P'hmitf, "Rav i, 'sagar'"]

Accessing List Elements
Elements of g list can be accessed using index values. Indexing starts from 0.
truits  tApple, "Mango', "Banana"]Output:
print(fruits[6])Apple

Modifying List Elements
Since lists are mutable, their values can be changed.fruits -T"Apple', "Mango", "Banana"]. Output:
fruits[1]="range"["Apple, "Orange", "Banana"]

Common List Methods
Python provides useful methods for list operations.
append()→ Add item pop()→Remove item by index
remove( → Delete item sort() → Sort list
insert() → Insert item

Applications of List
Lists are widely used in:
• Student Records • Data Analysis
• Shopping Lists • Inventory "Systems
• Product Management • Web Applications

Summary
A List is a versatile and powerful data type used to store multiple values in a single variable. It supports modification, indexing, and various operations, making it one of the
most important data structures in Python.

1.6 Tuple Data Type

Introduction to Tuple
A Tuple is an ordered collection of multiple items in Python.It is similar to a List, but unlike lists, tuples are immutable.Once a tuple is created, its elements cannot be modified.
Example: colors = (“Red”, “Green”, “Blue")

Characteristics of Tuple
The important characteristics of a Tuple are:
·Ordered collection of items. •Immutable in nature.
· Allows duplicate values, · Supports indexing."Uses parentheses ().
Because tuples are immutable, they provide better data security.

Creating a Tuple
Tuples are created using parentheses.
Example: numbers = (10, 20, 30, 40) names=(“Amit", “Ravi”, “Sagar")
mixed = (10, “Python", True)

Accessing Tuple Elements
Elements of a tuple can be accessed using index values.Example: colors (“Red", "Green", “Blue") print(colors[1)print(colors[1]) Output:Green Indexing starts from 0.

difference Between' List and Tuple
List:·Uses[]•Mutable •Values can be changed
Tuple:•Uses() •Immutable •Values cannot be changed Tuples are preferred when data should remain constanf.

Tuple Methods
Python provides a few built-in methods for tuples.count() → Counts occurrences of a value.
index() → Returns index of a value.
Example: numbers = (10, 20, 30, 20) numbers.count(20) Output:2

Applications of Tuple
Tuples are used in:
•Coordinates · Fixed Data Collections
·Configuration Settings •Employee Information
•Database Records • Scientific Applications

Summary
A Tuple is an ordered and immutable collection of items, It is useful when data should not be modified after creation and provides better reliability for fixed datasets.