Windows Function():-
Aggregate Functions:
max(), min(), count(), sum(), std(), avg()

rank():- Assigns a rank with gaps if there are ties.
dense_rank():-Assigns a rank without gaps for ties.
Value / Analytic
Lead() Accesses data from a subsequent row.

LAG() Accesses datafrom previous row.

First_Value() Returns the first value in a sorted partition.

Aggregate Sum(), Avg() Calculates running totals or moving average.

row_number():-Ranking: Row_Number() Assigns a unique sequential integer to rows.


Lag(column, offset):-
What it does: Returns the value from a previous row in the same result set.
 
Use Case: Comparing this month's revenue to last month's, or (as we did here) comparing a 'Silver' performer to a "Gold" performer.

Lead(column, offset):- 
What it does: The opposite of Lag; it reaches forward to a subsequent row.

Use Case: Predicting trends or calculating the time difference between the current event and the next event in a log.

Coalesce():-
Why we used it: The top performer in each region has no one "above" them. Lag() would return NULL for them.
Coalesce replaces that null with 0 so our math doesn't break.

Partition by:
over (partition by column_name)

Common Table Expressions:
with <aliasname> as 
      sql queries

With RankSales as (
     Select 
           Fullname,
           Region,
           SalesAmount,
           Lag(SalesAmount) over (partition by region order by Salesamount desc)
           as PreviousHighersales
    From salesteam
)
Select
      Fullname.
      region.
      salesamount,
      previoushighersales,
      coalesce(previousHighersales - salesamount, 0) as gaptoleader
From Rankedsales

Partition by :- Divides the data into logical groups (like buckers for North, South, etc.) before applying the function.

Rank():- Assigns a number to each row within the partition. If two people have the same sales, they get same rank and the next 
         rank is skipped.

AVG():- By using over(Partition by Region), it calculates the average for that specific region and displays it next to every employee in that region.

Sum():- When used with order by but without a partition, it create a running total.
